The heavens have long been a subject of human fascination and study. The regular motion of the stars and planets were at once a symbol of the divine order of the universe and a profound challenge for human understanding. For the ancient Greeks the separation between the terrestrial and celestial realms was absolute--the downward motion of falling objects was thought of as a "natural tendency" towards the center of the earth. The Greeks believed explaining motion on earth was a completely different problem from explaining why the earth went around the sun.

It was Nicholas Copernicus who first proposed, in 1543, that the earth moved around the sun. His book, De Revolutionibus Orbium Caelestium (On the Revolution of the Celestial Orbs) created a revolution in science that brought scientists such as Galileo into conflict with the Catholic Church. Even Kepler believed the heavens a mystical realm that obeyed a mathematical order unlike anything on earth. His three laws of planetary motion were based on the synthesis of a huge amount of observational data, compiled over many centuries. However, although fundamentally correct, Kepler's Laws were purely empirical; they facilitated prediction of planetary motion but did not explain why the planets should move in the way they did.

It was Sir Isaac Newton who not only provided this explanation in his famous inverse square law of gravitation, but managed to "synthesize" the explanation of motion on earth and motion in the heavens. This had profound philosophical and scientific consequences. The unification into what became the laws of gravitation became a symbol of the predictive and quantitative power of science. The fact that a single law could explain the motion of a cannonball and the motion of Mars revolutionized our understanding of our place in the universe.

In the centuries after Newton, scientists and mathematicians created powerful techniques and concepts for understanding complex phenomena such as tides and perturbations. In 1915 Albert Einstein published a new theory of gravitation (The General Theory of Relativity) that conceived of gravitational effects as caused by curvature in a four-dimensional space-time surface. Although Einstein's theory explains some observations that Newton's cannot, the inverse square law has remained an important tool in modern astrophysics and cosmology. Moreover, Newton's and Kepler's laws of gravitation can explain almost all the phenomena of orbits and terrestrial motion with which we will be concerned here.

Johannes Kepler (1571 - 1630) was greatly impressed by the beauty of the heavens. Using the framework devised by Nicholas Copernicus and meticulous observations he devised three laws from which the motion of the planets could be calculated. Although Kepler had no understanding of why the planets moved in the way they did, his laws are largely correct. They are of great significance for the study of gravitation because the fundamental principles of planetary motion can easily be understood from them. Moreover, these laws formed the background to Newton's thinking about planet interaction and the relationship between masses which led to his Universal Law of Gravitation.

Kepler's First Law states that the path of the planet is an ellipse with the sun at one focus. Although at the time it was commonly understood that the planets moved in circles around the sun, Kepler's data showed this belief to be erroneous. Only by understanding that orbits are elliptical can we begin to explain many of the observed phenomena of planetary motion.

Kepler's Second Law relates the speed of the motion of the planet to its distance from the sun (because the orbits are elliptical, the distance to the sun varies). In fact, it states that if a line is drawn from the sun to the planet (a radius), then the area swept out by that line in a certain time will be a constant. This means that when the planet is farthest from the sun it moves much more slowly than when it is closest to the sun. This law is basically a statement of the principle of conservation of angular momentum for planets.

Kepler's Third Law is somewhat different from the other two: it is more mathematical than the first and second laws, allowing a calculation to be made of the period of the orbit if the radius is known, or the radius to be calculated if the period is known. More precisely, it states that the square of the period of the orbit is proportional to the cube of the radius. This applies not only to planets orbiting the sun, but also to satellites orbiting the earth, and is therefore important in space technology.

In the following SparkNote Topics we shall see how Kepler's Laws formed a framework for Newton's thinking about gravity and how Kepler's laws can be derived from Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation.

In 1687 Sir Isaac Newton first published his Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy) which was a radical treatment of mechanics, establishing the concepts which were to dominate physics for the next two hundred years. Among the book's most important new concepts was Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation. Newton managed to take Kepler's Laws governing the motion of the planets and Galileo's ideas about kinematics and projectile motion and synthesize them into a law which governed both motion on earth and motion in the heavens. This was an achievement of enormous importance for physics; Newton's discoveries meant that the universe was a rational place in which the same principles of nature applied to all objects.

The Universal Law of Gravitation has several important features. First, it is an inverse square law, meaning that the strength of the force between two massive objects decreases in proportion to the square of the distance between them as they move farther apart. Second, the direction in which the force acts is always along the line (or vector) connecting the two gravitating objects. Moreover, because there is no "negative mass," gravity is always an attractive force. It is also noteworthy that gravity is a relatively weak force. Modern physicists consider there to be four fundamental forces in nature (the Strong and Weak Nuclear forces, the Electromagnetic force and gravity), of which gravity is the weakest. This means that gravity is only significant when very large masses are being considered.

In this chapter we will also consider how the gravitational constant) G is determined and how Newton's Theorem can simplify the calculation).

In Kepler and Newton we studied the basics of gravitation. Now we will explore some analytical tools that simplify the calculations involved with gravitating systems. Most of these were developed in the nineteenth century when physicists sought to solve problems involving many objects interacting under complicated conditions. One of the most important concepts that came out of their mathematical analysis was the notion of energy conservation. The idea of energy conservation necessitated the concept of potential energy, which, unlike the kinetic energy that manifests itself in motion, was considered to be the latent ability of the system to produce useful work. As we shall see, because potential energy is a scalar and not a vector, it can greatly simplify the calculation of the potential inherent in a large number of bodies at any point--the problem just reduces to summing the contributions of all the individual bodies. The force can then be found by taking the negative of the spatial derivative in the usual way (see Newton's Second Law).

We will use the concept of the gravitational potential energy to prove Newton's Shell Theorem, which asserts that a spherical mass can be treated as if all its mass were concentrated at its center for the purposes of calculating the gravitational force on an object outside it, and that a massive, thin shell exerts no gravitational force on a mass inside itself. Furthermore, we will state the Principle of Equivalence, which states that inertial mass, appearing in Newton's Second Law, is the same as the gravitational mass appearing the Universal Law of Gravitation.

The first part of this chapter explores in more mathematical detail some of the concepts introduced in the previous sections. The mathematics we will employ are more complicated than we have used elsewhere, and not necessarily crucial to gaining a good understanding of the laws of gravitation. The aim of this chapter, though, is to show that the shape of the orbits can be deduced explicitly and precisely using the Universal Law of Gravitation and what we know about gravitational potential energy and angular momentum. Moreover, this analysis will give us greater insight into the energies associated with the various orbital shapes.

In addition to furthering our study of orbits in general, we will also explore two interesting problems related to orbital energies. First, we will calculate the escape velocity, which is the surface velocity required to completely blast a projectile out of the gravitational field of a star or planet. It will be seen that this value is independent of the mass of the projectile being launched. A black hole is a collapsed star that has such strong gravitational field that its escape velocity exceeds the speed of light--it is for this reason that no light (or anything else for that matter) can ever escape from a black hole. Second, we will consider what happens to satellites when they encounter the atmosphere in low-earth orbits. The atmosphere creates a friction on the satellites, which causes a viscous drag. Contrary to normal intuition, we will show that this drag actually causes the satellite to increase its speed!
