Since force is the fundamental concept of Dynamics, we must give a clear definition of this concept before we proceed with Newtons Laws. A force is defined (very practically) as a push or a pull. Of course, we experience forces all the time in everyday lives. Whenever we lift something, push something or otherwise manipulate other objects, we are exerting a force. A force is a vector quantity, as it has both a magnitude and a direction. Let us show vector quality of a force practically: when exerting a force, for example pushing a crate, we can change the magnitude of our force by pushing harder or softer. We can also change the direction of our force, as we can push it one way or another. Since a force is a vector, all the rules of vector addition and subtraction, seen in Vectors apply. The vector quality of force allows us to manipulate forces in exactly the same way we manipulated velocity and acceleration in Kinematics.

With a formal definition of force, we can now examine its relation to motion through Newtons laws.

Intuitively, we can say that a force, at least in some way, causes motion. Newton makes this relation more precise in his first law:

An object moves with constant velocity unless acted upon by a net external force. 

What does this mean? Let's start by looking at a special case where the constant velocity is zero, i.e. the object is simply at rest. Newtons First Law states that the object will stay at rest unless a force acts upon it. Newtons First Law says an object will stay at rest unless a force acts upon it. This makes sense: the soccer ball isn't going anywhere unless someone kicks it. This concept is true not only for v = 0 , but for any constant velocity. Consider now a ball rolling with a constant velocity. Neglecting friction, the ball will continue to roll with the same velocity until it hits something, or someone kicks it. In physics terminology, it will keep the same velocity until acted upon by a net external force.

What does Newton mean by a net force? Consider a rope being used in a tug of war. There are definitely forces being applied to the rope but, if the two sides pull with the same force, the rope won't move. In this example, the two forces on the rope exactly cancel each other out, and there is no net force on the rope. It is thus possible for forces to act on an object, yet have the net force be zero. When evaluating the motion caused by forces acting on an object, remember to find the vector sum of those forces.

Also included in Newtons First Law, though not explicitly, is the concept of inertia. Inertia is defined as the tendency of an object to remain at a constant velocity. It is a fundamental property of all matter. In a sense, the idea of inertia is unnecessary; it just gives a name to the concept Newton describes in his First Law. However, you're bound to hear the word over and over in physics, so it is important to know to what it refers.

From our concept of inertia, we can develop the idea of an inertial reference frame, meaning a frame in which a body has no observed acceleration. This concept has limited application to classical mechanics, yet is essential for the study of Relativity. Consider a body with no net force acting upon it. For example, imagine yourself in an accelerating automobile. Clearly no net forces act upon the ground, yet from the frame of the car the ground is accelerating; in this case the car represents a non-inertial frame, and measurements of inertial fields from non-intertial fields do not conform to the rules of Newtons Laws. If, however, the car is traveling at a constant velocity, the ground will also appear to be moving back with a constant velocity. In this case, the frame of the car is inertial, as no net acceleration is observed. Any inertial reference frame is thus valid one in which to make calculations based on Newtons laws. Any inertial reference frame is thus valid one in based on Newtons laws. Before we use these force laws, we must make sure we are making measurements from an inertial frame.

 Mass is defined as the amount of matter in a given body. This definition seems a little vague, and needs some explanation. Mass is a scalar quantity, meaning it has no direction, and is a property of the object itself, not its location. Mass is measured in kilograms (kg). Given a certain object, its mass will be the same on earth, on the moon, or in empty space. In contrast, the weight of the object in these different circumstances will change. We will explore further the relation between mass and weight when we have completed discussing Newtons laws. Yet even without a complete understanding of weight we can use weight to better understand the concept of mass. In our everyday experience, the heavier an object is (the more weight it has), the more mass it has. Thus our experience tells us that a baseball has more mass than a balloon, for example. As long as we do not think of them as the same concept, describing mass in terms of weight allows us to conceptualize mass in practical terms. 

Our intuition tells us that a more massive object moves slower if given the same force as a less massive object. We can throw a baseball with much greater speed than we can throw a massive ball of lead. Our intuition is correct, and is stated in Newtons Second Law. 

Newtons Second Law gives us a quantitative relation between force and motion. Force and motion have a quantity relation with newtons second law.

Stated verbally, Newtons Second Law says that the net force (F) acting upon an object causes acceleration (a), with the magnitude of the acceleration directly proportional to the net force and inversely proportional to the mass (m). Learn it and love it. Like it or not, this equation will be used at almost all times in virtually every physics course you take.

The Second Law relates two vector quantities, force and acceleration. Because both force and acceleration are vector quantities, it is important to understand that the acceleration of an object will always be in the same direction as the sum of forces applied to the object. The magnitude of acceleration depends on the mass of the object, but is always proportional to the force. Newtons Second Law gives an exact relation between the vectors force and motion. Thus we can use this law to predict the motion of an object given forces acting upon it, on a quantitative level.

All forces result from the interaction of two bodies. One body exerts a force on another. Yet we haven't discussed what force, if any, is felt by the body giving the original force. Experience tells us that there is in fact a force. When we push a crate across the floor, our hands and arms certainly feel a force in the opposite direction. In fact, Newtons Third Law tells us that this force is exactly equal in magnitude and opposite in direction of the force we exert on the crate.

Stated in words, Newtons third law proclaims: to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. This law is quite simple and generally more intuitive than the other two. It also gives us a reason for many observed physical facts. If I am in a sailboat, I cannot move the boat simply by pushing on the front. Though I do exert a force on the boat, I also feel a force in the opposite direction. Thus the net force on the system (me and the boat) is zero, and the boat doesn't move. We need some external force, like wind, to move the boat. 

 Newtons third law also gives us a more complete definition of a force. Instead of merely a push or a pull, we can now understand a force as the mutual interaction between two bodies. Whenever two bodies interact in the physical world, a force results. Whether it be two balls bouncing off each other or the electrical attraction between a proton and an electron, the interaction of two bodies results in two equal and opposite forces, one acting on each body involved in the interaction. 

The concept of the center of mass allows us to describe the movement of a system of particles by the movement of a single point. We will use the center of mass to calculate the kinematics and dynamics of the system as a whole, regardless of the motion of the individual particles. 

Johannes Kepler (1571 - 1630) was greatly impressed by the beauty of the heavens. Using the framework devised by Nicholas Copernicus and meticulous observations he devised three laws from which the motion of the planets could be calculated. Although Kepler had no understanding of why the planets moved in the way they did, his laws are largely correct. They are of great significance for the study of gravitation because the fundamental principles of planetary motion can easily be understood from them. Moreover, these laws formed the background to Newtons thinking about planet interaction and the relationship between masses which led to his Universal Law of Gravitation. 

Kepler's First Law states that the path of the planet is an ellipse with the sun at one focus. Although at the time it was commonly understood that the planets moved in circles around the sun, Kepler's data showed this belief to be erroneous. Only by understanding that orbits are elliptical can we begin to explain many of the observed phenomena of planetary motion.  

 Kepler's Second Law relates the speed of the motion of the planet to its distance from the sun (because the orbits are elliptical, the distance to the sun varies). In fact, it states that if a line is drawn from the sun to the planet (a radius), then the area swept out by that line in a certain time will be a constant. This means that when the planet is farthest from the sun it moves much more slowly than when it is closest to the sun. This law is basically a statement of the principle of conservation of angular momentum for planets. 

Kepler's Third Law is somewhat different from the other two: it is more mathematical than the first and second laws, allowing a calculation to be made of the period of the orbit if the radius is known, or the radius to be calculated if the period is known. More precisely, it states that the square of the period of the orbit is proportional to the cube of the radius. This applies not only to planets orbiting the sun, but also to satellites orbiting the earth, and is therefore important in space technology. 

The Universal Law of Gravitation has several important features. First, it is an inverse square law, meaning that the strength of the force between two massive objects decreases in proportion to the square of the distance between them as they move farther apart. Second, the direction in which the force acts is always along the line (or vector) connecting the two gravitating objects. Moreover, because there is no "negative mass," gravity is always an attractive force. It is also noteworthy that gravity is a relatively weak force. Modern physicists consider there to be four fundamental forces in nature (the Strong and Weak Nuclear forces, the Electromagnetic force and gravity), of which gravity is the weakest. This means that gravity is only significant when very large masses are being considered. 

The study of thermodynamics is the study of systems that are too large to understand by mechanics alone. For many years, thermodynamics was understood vaguely, and many of the results had been determined only experimentally. Some results posed great theoretical challenges to physicists, who offered many unsuccessful attempts at explaining the origins of the formulas. motion is a change in position of an object with respect to time. 

With the advent of quantum mechanics came the explanations for the results. The mechanics of individual particles is still too complicated, however. For this reason, statistical physics plays a significant role in the basis of thermodynamics. Instead of worrying about the exact values of properties for each particle in a system, we look at the average values statistically over quantum probabilities. Even fundamental concepts like the energy of a system are derived as averages. 

 There is great symmetry in the structure of thermodynamics. The six variables we look at repeatedly parallel each other in formulations of the energy. We can use a mathematical tool known as the Legendre Transform to posit alternate definitions of energy. This symmetry allows us to derive numerous relationships between the variables, and the multiple definitions of energy greatly simplify problem solving throughout all of thermodynamics.Only by understanding that orbits are elliptical can we begin to explain many of the observed phenomena of planetary motion and they are in orbit. 

We can form the Partition Function as a measure of the total weighted probabilities of the various states of a system, and relate this quantum counting result to the energy of a the system. The spectrum of blackbody radiation is derived directly from this counting. For systems in thermal and diffusive contact with a reservoir, the Gibbs Sum replaces the Partition Function. 

With the few tools developed up to that point, the entire ideal gas problem can be solved, including the derivation of expressions for all of the interesting variables that describe the gas. In the non-classical regime, an ideal gas behaves quite differently depending on the nature of its constituents . A gas comprised of fermions exhibits a regime of total occupation and a regime of zero occupation, while a gas comprised of bosons can form an Einstein condensate by crowding into the ground orbital of the system. 

Heat engines and other devices were the historical motivation for the development of thermodynamics as a science. The devices can be well explained using the framework already developed, and illustrative diagrams can be drawn to make plain the energy and entropy flow involved. Real engines undergo repeated cycles to achieve their purpose. We look at a simplified model known as the Carnot cycle, and discuss different processes and how they relate to the various energies defined. 

When we defined the electric field, we first established the electric charge, and related the interaction of electric charges through Coulomb's Law. Unfortunately we cannot do the same for magnetic fields, because magnetic charges do not exist. Whereas electric fields originate from a single point charge, magnetic fields come from a wide variety of sources: currents in wires of varying shapes or forms, permanent magnets, etc. Instead of beginning with a description of the field created by each of these examples, we must define the magnetic field in terms of the force exerted by the field on a moving point charge. 

Take your right hand (it is important not to use the left one), and stick your thumb, your index finger and your middle finger in mutually perpendicular directions. Each one of these fingers represents a vector quantity: the thumb points in the direction of the velocity of the positively charged particle, the index finger points in the direction of the magnetic field, and the middle finger points in the direction of the force felt by the moving charge. Try it out on the above figure: point your thumb in the negative x direction and your index finger in the negative y direction. Hopefully you will find that your middle finger points in the positive z direction, which is exactly the direction of the force. This is known as the first right hand rule. 

In physics, motion is a change in position of an object with respect to time and its reference point. motion is typically described in terms of displacement, direction, velocity, acceleration, and time. motion is observed by attaching a frame of reference to a body and measuring its change in position relative to that frame. motion is typically described in terms of displacement, direction and velocity.







